The following content is
provided under a Creative
Commons license.
Your support will help
MIT OpenCourseWare
continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free.
To make a donation or to
view additional materials
from hundreds of MIT courses,
visit MIT OpenCourseWare
at ocw.mit.edu.
PROFESSOR: Well, while
people are filing in,
we can chat a little bit
about the quiz overall.
I was very, very impressed,
at least with the question 1
and question 2, which I graded.
I haven't graded question 3.
So here's all the statistics.
You can see that this was
a pretty difficult quiz,
actually.
We do agree.
You have evidence to--
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: --to overcome
that null hypothesis
that it was a difficult quiz.
So the average there about 78,
79, with a fairly wide spread--
what we will do is post both the
quiz and the solutions-- which
may be more interesting
to you, since you already
have the quiz.
And if you do see anything,
feel free to chat with us
about the question or whatever.
If you're concerned about a
point here or point there,
I really wouldn't
worry about it.
Our grading is-- we attempt
to be as accurate as possible,
but we reserve the right to
have a little bit of variation,
given the nature of the
course, in the grading.
And we will, of course,
be treating everything
a little bit as a
mix in at the end,
from this quiz grade, the
second quiz grade, class
participation, homeworks--
all of that.
So I think the main thing to
do is look at the solutions
and make sure that
you understand
at least the approaches that
we took in the solutions--
which is not to say that some
of the approaches that people
took on the quiz is wrong.
In fact, on problem 2, I
think the biggest thing
that we observed is people
answered the third part, if you
remember, really the hard way.
And unfortunately, you may have
burned a fair amount of time
on that with very detailed
t-tests, and f-tests,
and complicated
hypothesis tests--
whereas what you had was
already the confidence intervals
from parts A and
B that you could
use directly, in many
cases, to make inferences.
So were there any
questions on the quiz--
top level, not detailed?
OK, well, take a look at those.
And again, talk to
Hayden or I if--
more if you have any confusions,
I think, is the main thing.
OK, so here's the
plan for today.
We started on full factorial
models design of experiments
last time.
I'm going to pick up where
we left off on some of that,
talk a little bit more about the
extension of that to generalize
to the k experiments.
The key idea here is, again,
picking out experimental design
points so that you can fit
particular kinds of models.
And we'll start, again, with
ANOVA for linear models,
and then move on to
asking the question, what
if a linear model
is not sufficient?
How do if a linear
model is not sufficient?
How do you check for the
adequacy of the model form?
Is there evidence that you
need higher order terms,
like a quadratic
or other curvature?
So we'll spend the first
half really focused on that.
Then we'll start moving
into some additional issues
in experimental design--
these ideas of blocks and
confounding, as well as--
those same issues
come out very strongly
in fractional factorial designs.
So we'll get to that.
Now, I posted on the
website reading assignment.
The key is probably
Montgomery chapter 12.
I find that a little
bit better description
than May and Spanos.
But there are some
additional topics
at the end of the May
and Spanos chapter.
I can't remember which
chapter that is--
7, 13-- can't remember.
But it's posted on the website.
And so there are
some things you'll
want to scan in May
and Spanos as well.
So recall that last time we
started talking a little bit
about the kinds of models
that are associated
with different
experimental designs.
So for example, we start
with the simple model--
it's not the simplest, because
we already have two factors,
but a very simple 2-by-2
or 2 to the 2 model
where, again, what
we've got are two levels
in each of two factors.
So our factors
here are x1 and x2,
and we've got two
different levels.
So we're just picking the
corner points or extremal points
for that.
And we talked last
time about how
this can generate a
regression model that
has both mean and
first-order terms,
as well as an interaction term.
We also talked about
the way that you
can estimate these
using contrast,
and I'm going to pick
up on that a little bit,
where we talk about the
effective varying x1--
the total effect being a
movement in the output,
or an average
movement in the output
by a magnitude A in these
coded coefficients for x1--
as well as effects for B
and the interaction effect.
Basically, we're
seeing that there
is this correspondence
between a regression approach
or a contrast approach.
It's a very fast,
quick way to estimate
these coefficients using these
kinds of design of experiments.
OK, that's not good.
That's very strange.
All right, so a little
bit of the terminology
that we talked about just
to remind us, and then
expand on that a little bit--
there is this notion
of a contrast that's
going to get us to
being able to estimate
the effect of, say, coefficient
A, or beta 1, or beta--
each of our two main effects
or the interaction effects.
And these condensed down
tables summarizing the design
of your experiment are
really useful tools
for being able to
generate these contrasts,
for being able to identify
what the mix of level settings
are for each of the trial
runs that you do, and so on.
So a little bit of
terminology-- again, we
said this column here, the trial
column, is essentially our run.
And we can label them in
a shorthand that tells us
what our factor settings
are, our level settings
are for each of
our two factors--
our x1 factor-- that's
one-- and our x2 factor.
So the first label here
is just the low setting
for both of our factors, and
we'll label that with a 1.
Our high setting
for the a factor--
we label that one with a
high setting, or a plus.
Sometimes we'll label
that as a plus 1--
and our low setting then,
for everything else, for b.
Our b factor-- that's where
we're set that one high.
And when we set
both of them high,
that's our plus setting
for the two of them.
Now, we can also think
about, what is the factor
level for the interaction?
And we do that with this very
funky shorthand algebra, just
saying, OK, AB is really--
think of that as a
multiplication of the A and B
factors.
So a minus 1 and a minus
1 gives a plus 1 there--
and similarly for all
of the other columns.
That generates the level
setting, if you will,
for each of those combinations.
Now, in the actual
experiment, of course,
we're only setting x1 and
x2 for each of our trials.
These experimental interaction
columns are essentially giving
us information that we need
in order to form the contrast
in the shorthand way
of estimating effects,
as well as-- and we'll see
this a little bit later--
as well as telling us what the
interaction term should be,
if we're going to
form regression--
including do the regression
on the interaction factor.
So it's pretty funky,
all intertwined here.
Something strange
in our slides--
I don't know what that is.
That's supposed to be a
dot, just a multiplication--
because now we can
say, OK, how do we
form the contrast between
our different combinations
of settings in order to
estimate the effect of A?
And essentially what
we're going to be doing
is forming the average
between the high for A--
this column and this column--
or the difference between
the average of those two
columns and these two settings.
So I'm basically
forming the contrast
in each case for each
factor as the difference
between the high
and low setting.
And so that's actually why we
need the interaction factor,
so we can look at the high
settings for the interaction,
the AB and the 1, and then
the minus A and the minus B.
Where are these coming from?
A much better way
to picture this
is if we look at
this graphically.
So what I'm going to do
here first is generalize.
This is a 2 to the 3 design.
In more general terms, we
can do a full factorial
with any number of factors and
form this sort of hypercube,
again, with corner points
at all combinations
at the high and low values--
or levels for each
of our setting.
And on that
hypercube-- so now I've
got A factor, B
factor, and C factor.
This is a nice
picture for forming
what that contrast
is doing and how
we're estimating the average
effect of changing one factor
at a time on this picture.
So just conceptually,
or intuitively,
if you were trying to form an
estimate of the factor effect
A associated with
some variable x1,
notice that-- what we've got.
At all of these settings on
the left, shaded with the blue,
those are all low
settings for our a factor.
I'm varying B and C also,
but for all of those,
I'm holding the a
factor at the low value.
And then similarly,
on the red side,
I'm holding the a
factor at the high value
in all of those cases--
maybe varying other things too.
But if I think that those
other effects are basically
balancing out, now what
I've got is a difference
between the A high and the A
low as a net overall estimate
of the total effective
changing variable x1,
changing the variable
associated with A.
And that's all that the
contrasts are doing.
They're simply saying,
OK, the high contrast
is all of the places
where A is set
high minus all of the
places where A is set low.
Form that difference.
Recall that we've got--
I need to take the average.
So in each of these cases,
I've got four points at high
and four points at low,
so I'm taking the average
and taking the difference.
That's my estimate of
the total net effect.
Question--
AUDIENCE: What
happens if I locate
AC and I have a diagram of four
points of the same [INAUDIBLE]??
PROFESSOR: OK, say
that question again.
Here's AC.
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
It's like then I think
if I move from 0.1 to AC,
and then I have that points
AC, BC, and AB are in between.
[INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: So far
what we've done
is only estimated
one of the contrasts.
It looks like you're actually
getting close to estimating
a different term in a model.
So what we did here was just
to estimate the a effect.
I would also need to do the
same thing for the B effect.
So that's telling
me, if I vary x2--
and I can similarly do
that for the C effect.
But then there's
the question, well,
what if there's an interaction
between two of these terms?
And one can also form a contrast
for an interaction effect.
And maybe this is not exactly
what you are describing,
but it's getting close to
other ways of combining
some of these effects.
So it turns out what this does
is makes a balanced combination
of our data points to be able
to take advantage of that AB
column.
This is just basically taking
the high and low combinations
and forming that estimate
of the AB interaction
effect using the contrast
between these points.
Now, there would also be
another contrast for the BC
interaction, if you rotated
these around and formed
the plane where you took the
high-low combinations of B
and C, instead of A and B. OK?
Does that get at your
question, or was there--
you can always form different
combinations of things.
The question is, what
combination do you
need in order to
be able to estimate
the coefficient in the model?
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
I mean, [INAUDIBLE].
I don't know.
It does not like
derivatives of A, B, and C.
PROFESSOR: Right.
AUDIENCE: You just take
[INAUDIBLE] and cross them.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
That cross thing is
intuitive in the sense--
only in the sense that
it corresponds nicely--
you can generate it once
you have this column.
So now I can connect
up the high points,
and that would be one plane.
Connect up the low points--
that's my other plane.
And then I take the difference.
But it's not entirely intuitive
why that particular combination
gives you the estimate
of that coefficient.
I agree with that.
So this is the shorthand
that gives the answer.
In fact, I don't have a
good intuitive explanation,
just looking purely
at this picture,
why that estimates
the interaction.
The closest I can come is almost
in two dimensions, instead
of three, with these interaction
plots that we've drawn before.
So the basic interaction
plot would look and say,
if I just have x1
and x2 values, I just
draw them as here's my output
as I vary x1 from high to low,
holding x2 low, that
would be one effect.
If now I let x2 be high, I
don't have just an offset,
but I've got a different
delta here than here.
That means that, in combination,
x1 and x2 work together
to do something different
than purely x1 or x3.
There is not just
purely an additive
A effect and a B effect,
but there is an AB effect.
So in two dimensions,
essentially
what you're doing is
looking at forming
the delta from this combination
and this combination,
and saying there
is a difference--
an extra delta between the two.
In 3D, it's a little
harder to see,
but I think it's doing
conceptually that same thing.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Why do you take
the average divide it by 4
but not do the same
in the two factor?
PROFESSOR: Oh, I think
we did in the two factor.
AUDIENCE: No, no, in the
slide previous to that--
PROFESSOR: So the
4 is basically just
because I'm taking the
average from each of the--
this plane has four points,
so I'm just taking the average
from that the difference
from that, so the 4
is coming from the number of
points I had in each average.
That's an estimate
of the total effect.
Then there's one
additional subtle point,
which is, how do I
get from that factor--
total of net effect, main effect
A, or interaction effect AB--
to an estimate of the
model coefficient?
And that's where some
scaling comes into play.
What we've done
in these pictures
is scale our x1 and x2 to a
low of minus 1 and a high of 1,
and intermediate point of 0.
Let's say this was
the overall a effect.
What I'd like is
something that goes like y
equals beta 0 plus beta 1 x1.
And so what I've got is
a total range in x1 of 2.
So I have to basically scale
this so that I've got A/2 x1.
As x goes from 0 to 1, I've
got half of the effect,
and as x goes from
0 to minus 1, I've
got the other half
of the effective.
So that's where beta
1 is equal to the A/2.
Again, a lot of what
I'm saying is only true
if we're using the scaled
coefficients for x1,
from minus 1 to plus 1.
And then all of this magical
shorthand of these column
tables, the multiplication
column tables,
the formation of these contrasts
works out really nicely.
And so that's where you'll
look in the literature,
and there's so much machinery
around this that makes
it relatively quick and easy.
So we can extend all
of this, again, to--
beyond one factor,
or two factors,
to three factors,
or any k factors.
So we can consider,
for example, a 2
to the third experiment, where
now we have three factors--
an x1, x2, x3--
or going with an A effect,
B effect, and C effect.
And then we can just extend
this to the different treatment
combinations.
And essentially,
what we're doing here
is formulating every
possible corner point,
every possible combination
of the high and low
for each of the settings.
And the same idea applies.
Here I've indicated them
with a plus 1, minus 1,
rather than just plus minus,
but it's exactly the same idea.
And you can see C
already lurking here.
Which runs would you use
to estimate the C effect?
That one sort of
leaps out at us,
as we happen to have
ordered this table.
I would average these runs--
runs 5, 6, 7, and 8--
average runs 1, 2, 3, and
4, take the difference,
and that's my estimate
of the C effect.
That makes good intuitive sense.
Now, that's the contrast
that I would do, again,
for C. If I also want
to form contrasts
for the other coefficients,
it's exactly the same thing,
but the table is
not quite oriented
to make it leap out at me.
But essentially,
for the A contrast,
I'm just forming
those for my A, AB.
That's my plus 1's, all my
pluses, and all my minuses,
forming that as my contrast.
I can very quickly then
estimate that main effect
using this big column.
I can also estimate
my interaction terms.
We already talked about
an AB interaction.
If I have three model--
or three factors, I can have
three-way interactions where,
depending on all of the
settings of A, B, and C,
I might get a little
boost up or down,
different than I would
just from A, B, C,
and even different
from the boost
I got by having A
and B in combination.
I can have these subtle
three-way interactions,
and you can form the contrast
and estimate that effect
in a similar fashion using
the ABC interaction column,
and form the
contrast using that.
Two steps to get to here--
one step is, how do I
generate this column?
And then the second step
is then using that column
to form an estimate of
the interaction effect.
So how do we get to ABC column?
By extension of what I told
you about the AB column--
how do you generate that?
AUDIENCE: Just multiply.
PROFESSOR: Just multiply.
It's kind of this
repeated multiplication.
I just take the A,
B, and C columns
and pointwise multiply
out those factors.
So minus 1 minus 1
minus 1 gives me--
I overwrote it-- there we go--
gives me a minus 1.
And I similarly do that
for all of the columns.
Once I have that, then
doing the second step
is pretty simple to
estimate that contrast.
Once we've got the contrast,
just the differences
in the columns, then I do
have to do a little bit
of that normalization.
Actually, I probably am not
completely consistent here.
The contrast is just the
differences between the points.
I then have to do the average
over the number of points.
Oops-- well, two things--
to form the estimate
of the overall effect,
first off, I have to divide
by the number of points
I had in each of
those contrasts,
which is basically just
2 to the k minus 1.
When we had that cube
with eight points,
it was 2 to the
third 8 divided by 2,
because I'm forming half of the
points in one contrast, half
of the points in the other.
And then this n, which we
haven't talked about very much,
is just the replicates.
I can do multiple runs at
each experimental point,
so I can also average those in.
So it's also possible that
we've got more than one
run at every experimental
combination point.
So that's how we can
estimate those effects.
And then, once we have that,
for example, here, that's
how we get the-- in
the 2 to the third,
we get a 1/4 factor that we saw
earlier for the three factor
cube in three-dimensional
space as an estimate
for the overall effect.
OK, now, another
point is here I'm
talking about estimating our
model using these contrasts
and factor effects.
Another approach, and
probably the approach
that you would end up using
more often if you actually
had computers handy,
is to do a regression.
Take your data, put it
in, solve the regression
equations, and regress
to get your estimate
of your coefficients.
And essentially, these big
tables that we talked about,
these combinations are still
critical and very, very useful,
because that's basically how
you form the x matrix that
describes the combinations
of all of your factor levels
that you feed into
the regression.
In fact, your coded values
from minus 1 to plus 1,
this is your x
matrix right there,
because what you're trying to do
is estimate a beta 0, a beta 1,
and a beta 2, and a beta 3--
oops-- beta 3, and then also
trying to estimate these
interaction terms--
a beta 1, 3; a beta 1, 3; beta
2, 3; and even a beta 1, 2, 3.
And so you're basically
fictitiously creating
these additional variables
for the product of x1, x2, x3
in your regression.
So you need this table, even
if you're doing regression,
in order to be able to
set up the regression
if you want to also
include these interaction
terms in your regression model.
You have to create
fictitious columns of data
based on those interactions,
the product of your three input
settings.
And this is basically telling
you exactly what those were.
So this is essentially
showing that same thing
I just described in words.
What we're talking about
here is basically setting up
to do the
pseudo-inverse when I've
got my data, with my x matrix
being my setup of my input
conditions, and then
y being my output,
and then beta being my
vector of coefficients
with both the mean, the main
effects, and the interaction
effects.
So I would have to create the
column of the x1, x2 product
in order to be able to do that.
And then you can see again
here the relationship
between the contrasts idea
and the regression idea
that comes out.
OK, relatively clear?
Questions on that?
OK.
So now we've estimated
coefficients.
We've estimated effects,
either in the regression
or the contrast approach.
A key question is--
you do that.
You get a value for A--
the A effect that's non-zero.
Do you think it's
significant or not?
Is it real or not, or would you
have observed that amount of A
by chance alone, given random
noise in your experiment?
This is exactly back
to the ANOVA question
that we were asking earlier.
I would like to know the
significance of these effects.
Is it large enough to
give me 90% confidence
or 95% confidence that
it's real, that it wouldn't
have occurred by chance alone?
And so essentially,
what we want to do
is run the ANOVA for
each of our effects.
If I have three
factors, I'd like
to know, is the main effect
associated with factor two--
is that significant?
I can also do that for
interaction effects.
And very often, you might
see large main effects,
but you want to
ask the question,
is there really an
interaction between these two?
Can I think of them as
separable coefficients
or separable knobs
on my equipment,
or do I have to think of
them as highly coupled?
I'd like to know the
significance of the interaction
effect.
So we essentially just use the
ANOVA approach fairly directly,
where what we're
doing is forming
an estimate of the total
deviations associated
with that effect, the sum of
squared deviations, which turns
out to be the contrast
squared, and then
divided by the n over 2k factor.
There's a homework
problem set where
you get to help derive
why that it's true,
or convince yourself
why that is true.
You're looking forward
to it, I can see.
But what that lets
us do is look again
at the total amount of magnitude
of sum of squared deviations
around a mean associated
with that effect,
and then look at
that in comparison
to some estimate of
the random noise,
and do an F-test, just like
we normally do with ANOVA.
So you can start
to, again, do that.
If you've got two
effects or two factors,
you would look for
the question, is there
something significant in the
A effect, in the B effect,
and in the interaction?
And then the remaining
sum of squared deviations
or the residual gives
you your error estimate
that you use in the
denominator, and that's
how you decompose the
total observed variations.
So then you can form
that into an ANOVA table,
again, looking at
the main effects
A and B, the interaction effect,
and an estimate of the error.
Again, we get this
little funky sine.
That's supposed to just
be a multiplication.
That's just a little dot--
where, again, you're forming
estimates of the mean squares,
and then ratios of those.
And then you do
your F-test to see
if the F-is higher than that.
So this is one way of looking
at it, in terms of contrast.
If, instead of forming contrast,
you had used the regression
and come up with regression
coefficients associated
with each of the terms,
you can similarly
form the sum of squares
and the mean squares
from that perspective.
And in the regression form, by
the way, that turns out nicely,
because it's-- also gives you
the chance to not subtract off
the mean from everything,
but actually estimate whether
the mean may be significantly
different than 0.
But it's essentially
the same thing.
OK, so what I've
tried to convey to
you here is that you can
use ANOVA to estimate--
that's a tool we already know--
to estimate whether the
effects are significant
or not, and whether
you should include
that term in your model.
If you don't have enough
evidence that that value--
the coefficient
associated with x1--
might be non-zero, you're
probably better off not
including it in your model--
in which case, those--
any little squiggles
that might be there,
but you're not confident
really are there
contribute to your error term.
And you treat them
basically as noise, rather
than trying to fit them.
OK, so let's try this
out for an example.
This is one of the sets
of data that we looked
at very early in the term.
It's the break forming.
Remember, the press--
we have either aluminum
or stainless steel, and
we've got an angled press,
and we're pressing it
down into some depth
and trying to bend that
piece of sheet metal.
And that was actually
a designed experiment.
In fact, the two factors
that we were looking at here
is how deep the punch
goes in and what
the material type was--
either aluminum or steel.
And this is just identifying
the factor levels
that I'm going to
associate with these terms.
Now, this is actually
an interesting one,
because this is a
discrete factor level.
Well, this is a more of a
continuous factor level.
And you'll catch a
little bit later--
there's something
a little bit odd,
where we talk about
the zero factor sitting
between aluminum and steel.
That actually doesn't
make any sense.
But I can talk about perhaps
the zero factor setting
of 0.45 inches halfway
between the low
and the high of a
continuous parameter.
So I like this because
it's mixing or showing
that the same tools
and technology mostly
work for both discrete decisions
and design of experiments,
and continuous ones.
And we'll see where it
doesn't a little bit later.
So let's try out a very simple
designed experiment, a 2
to the 2 factor where the final
angle after removing the punch
is our output.
This is the actual data.
What we've got is, for
each of the level settings,
we've got replicates.
So I'm doing 10
replicates at each test
setting of the high and low
combination for x1 and x2.
So I've got four
different corners,
four different
combinations, 10 replicates.
And here's the data for that.
By the way-- we'll come back
to this a little bit later--
but if this is run number and
if those are done in time,
there's actually
something a little risky
in this experimental design.
This is foreshadowing
to coming back
to additional issues
of nasty things
you've got to keep in mind
when you do design experiments,
but what if there was some time
degradation, some time where
in the tool?
The problem is you
wouldn't really
be able to distinguish a
time effect from a change
in the factor setting.
So one approach that you might--
if you can cheaply do it--
here you might actually
have had to make maybe
some kind of machine
setup change,
and you wouldn't
want to do this.
But you might randomize
the order of your runs
in time to block against
the effective time.
And we'll come back to that.
But here, it's a simple--
I do all of my low-low
combinations first,
then I did my low-high, then
my high-low, than my high-high.
So that's our data.
Now, what we're doing
here, first off,
is I'm just going
to form the mean--
I take that the mean of
those 10 points, and that's
going to be my y bar at
each of my level settings.
So I'm reducing it down
from the 10 replicates
down to four means.
So this is my mean
at each of those four
different conditions.
And now I have my
output, my y vector--
setting up for a regression--
as being the observed means.
What's my x matrix setting
up for my regression?
Oops-- it's based on
the level settings.
But notice, we also
add in that one factor.
That one factor is
basically giving us--
when I multiply out
my matrix, that's
corresponding to my
beta 0, my overall mean,
so that what that's going to do
is be able to add all of those
up, divide by 4, and
give me an estimate
of the overall grand
mean of my output.
And we also create the
x1, x2 cross factor
in order to be able to
estimate and interaction term.
So overall then, this
here is my x matrix.
I can then solve it.
Now, notice we're using
the direct inverse, and not
the pseudo-inverse.
Why?
Remember, ultimately,
we've got y equals beta x.
That's the model
we're trying to form--
beta 0 plus beta 1, beta 2
plus an interaction term.
In this approach,
how many data points
do I have fitting
into this regression?
My y vector was
four data points,
because it was just the means.
How many coefficients?
Four-- I can exactly fit
my four coefficients,
and that's why I can
do the direct inverse.
And when I do that,
it directly pops out
these values from my data
coefficients, which feed
or give me my regression model.
What's epsilon in this model?
0-- it's 0.
I exactly fit my
four data points
with my four coefficients.
I don't even have any extra
data to estimate epsilon,
if I just use the mean values.
However, if I go
back and expand out--
realize I had 10 replicates
at each of those mean values,
that's one form--
or one source of information
about pure replication error--
that is to say, noise
factors in the data.
So in this approach,
where I just
use the mean and
the regression, I
don't have an
estimate for epsilon.
I would have to
look back and form
a separate pool of
estimate across my four
experimental data points for the
noise variance in the system.
OK, let's see.
What else do I want to say here?
I thought I had another example.
OK, we'll come back to that.
So once I've got the model,
this is essentially the model
that I have of the true
underlying process--
again, first-order, linear,
plus an interaction--
plus maybe I have
lingering in my head,
there might still be some higher
order quadratic dependence,
for example, on punch depth.
I haven't really sampled enough
to be able to estimate that.
And I also have some noise.
The model that I have fit
right here, my y hat estimate,
includes estimates--
I guess I should
say estimates here--
for these different terms.
And what we're
basically saying is
we're lumping in together
all of the errors that
might be lurking as
two effects together.
One is random
noise and the other
is neglected higher order terms.
That's our acronym for
higher order terms.
Question--
AUDIENCE: What if you put
the order of [INAUDIBLE]??
Then you can actually
get epsilon 0.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So the question was, what if
you add additional higher order
terms to drive epsilon to 0?
This is a very good
point, because if I
don't have any
replicates, I could always
add model terms
until I finally get
to where I have a perfect fit--
just like we saw with the
four data points and four--
in which case, my
residual then is 0.
But I've added model terms.
But I also have no
way, in that case,
of knowing whether the model
terms are significant or not.
If I have replicates,
on the other hand,
then we will almost never--
if there's any noise in
the replicates, where
the replicates do
not lie exactly
on top of each other for every
rerun at the same condition,
then there's no way to drive the
residuals to 0, because I will
have pure process
error at least,
even if I've added all the
model terms I need to drive
model error, the HOT, to 0.
So we've got actually
these two things going on.
We've got two key sources of
residuals, lack of perfection
in our model that we
want to talk about how
we distinguish and detect--
because one of those is whether
we have an adequate model form.
Do I have the right terms and
enough of the terms in there?
Or is there just replication
variance, noise--
which I can't fit?
All I can do is estimate
the stigma associated
with that replicate noise.
That's the key question
that we want to get to.
Before we get to breaking
down the residuals,
one thing that you
should always do
after you fit your model is
actually look at the residuals
to see if there are
trends qualitatively that
may be missing, because
that will often give you
a lot of insight into whether
it's a model structure problem
or not.
And so for this data, what
we've actually done here
is look at the residuals
associated with the 10
replicates that we've got.
And what you'll see is, first
off, the mean of your residuals
had better be 0.
Otherwise, you've actually got a
screw up somewhere in your fit,
just mechanically.
But what you would
like to see is,
essentially, the
residuals ought to not
depend on the level setting or
the experimental data point.
Especially with
continuous parameters,
if what you see is the residuals
for small values are very tiny
and the residuals for big
values are really, really large,
that actually violates some
of the assumptions we've
made in the model fitting.
And you might need to go and do
a transformation of your data--
perhaps something like a
logarithmic transformation
or some other transformation
of your y output data--
because your residuals are
not all n 0 sigma squared,
as we assume--
the same variance for
each of your data points.
Question--
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] mentioned
if we have four thumbs
and four data points to
error, thumb moves to 0.
But isn't that
supposing the x1 and x2,
that we've chosen our only
two factors which [INAUDIBLE]..
We could have [INAUDIBLE]
and x3 [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Yes.
AUDIENCE: In which case
you're still [INAUDIBLE]
and it should still
be pretty significant.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So the question, for
folks in Singapore
who may not have
heard that, was,
aren't there other possible
sources of residual or error--
including, for
example other factors,
like an x3 factor that
we didn't even consider
is lurking underneath?
And that's absolutely true.
Those are all potential
additional sources of--
I guess you could look at it
as either model error or noise.
What we're doing is
treating it all as noise.
And we'll talk a little bit
more about nuisance factors
and how we might
walk against that.
But essentially, we're
lumping all of those things
into just the sigma squared,
unless we're explicitly
breaking them out,
treating them in our model.
AUDIENCE: Hold on.
There's a question.
PROFESSOR: Yes-- question--
AUDIENCE: What if I don't have
enough data-- for example,
I want to have my
replicate, but I still
want to estimate the residual?
Can I just drop
the higher orders
and use the data points
to estimate the residual?
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So you did, essentially,
the special case where,
if you believe really
the higher order term,
or even the interaction
term in our 2-by-2--
let's say I really
believe that really is not
any reason for there to
be an AB interaction--
you can use that as
essentially a replicate,
and not include that
in the model term--
in which case, then I've got
four data points, three model
terms--
beta 0, beta 1, beta 2.
And I've got the barest
bones of additional data
to be able to form an error
estimate, with basically
treating the
interaction as noise,
because I don't
think that it's real.
And then you can do--
you've got just enough
to be able to at least
ask minimal questions
about significance.
One last thing that we always
want to do with our residuals
is do a quick test
or check to see,
is it reasonable to think
that these things are normally
distributed?
So you can, again,
do a qq plot and see
if there's strong evidence of
something strange going on.
Now, I said here we had
to do-- if I used my y
average as my output,
I can do the regression
and solve directly.
You could also formulate
the regression problem
using all of the data,
and not pre-calculating
the average for each of my
four settings, in which case
we set up our data
little bit larger.
I still have my--
I don't know why
it became an eta.
I guess there's my eta.
That's still a y.
This is my y data.
I still have my x, which
has my main effects
and my interaction.
But now each of the replicates--
for example-- I don't
know if you can see it,
but this is a 1, 1,
1 setting, and that's
one of those outputs.
Here's another 1, 1, 1, and the
output for that particular run.
In other words, I have
multiple rows in my data.
I have 10 rows with the
same factor settings,
and each one of which has
a different output, y.
And now I can set up
and do my regression.
Now I have to use
the pseudo-inverse,
because I've got more data
than I've got coefficients.
So I'm doing my
least squares fitting
using my pseudo-inverse.
And what pops out,
if you actually
do that with this data,
is exactly the same data.
Thank God, right?
So it's the same estimates
of beta as before.
Now, you might also
have directly a residual
based on the difference
between your predicted y--
your y hat-- and
your actual measured.
I've got 40 of
those values, and I
can use that as my
overall estimate
for my overall residual
in that-- in this case.
So it sort of pops
right out as well,
and you can form
the same residual.
So if you actually plot
this for the response
surface for our very simple
linear model with interaction,
this is what you see.
As you change the material
axis from your high
to low in your depth
axis, you've got this--
looks like mostly a slanted
plane kind of effect.
Oh, let me ask you.
Just looking at the
plot, do you think
there's a significant
effect from factor x1?
Significant effect
from factor x2?
I see some heads shaking.
Oh, looks like
it's a nice trend--
there's lots of movement
in the output values.
Sure-- why not?
Just looking at this plot,
I argue, you can't tell.
This is just your best
fit based on your betas,
but you don't actually
know whether they're
significant or
not, just plotting
the output of your model.
Here's why.
For example, if I
were to tell you, OK,
at this combination of depth
and material, at the plus 1,
plus 1, I actually plotted the
10 different values you saw,
and they all looked like this.
And if I plotted the low-low
and they all look like this,
now you'd start to say,
yeah, my model output--
there's a big separation
between those two.
I think that's significant.
On the other hand, if I
plotted and showed you
a scatter around
here that was huge
and a scatter of
your actual data
points around this condition
that was also huge,
and there was big
overlap between the two,
now you'd be a little
more leery, right?
You'd say, well,
that was my best bet,
but I'm not sure that
they're actually significant.
So this highlights, again,
you've got to use the ANOVA
as well to be able to
decide, is there actually
significance to the
model coefficient
that we were looking at?
It's just another picture.
This is looking a
little bit at the side.
This is pointing out, if I
believe that the terms are
significant, you could
ask the question,
is there an interaction effect?
It looks like there's not quite
parallelism between these two
lines.
There may be an AB
interaction, but I'd also
need to ask the question
about significance on that.
So that's the key question.
The effects of these terms--
are they significant or not?
We would do the ANOVA analysis.
By the way, the ANOVA
and the t-test--
almost the same.
In fact, I think another
problem on the problem set
is understanding a little
bit the relationship
between these two ways of
looking at the problem.
If I were to just look at this
data and look at the effect
of depth only on the aluminum--
so I'm just holding--
just looking at the
aluminum parts--
for the depth of 0.6
and the depth of 0.3,
there's the spread in my data.
I can look and say,
what's the variation
within the test compared to
the variation between tests?
I could then think
of that as my F-test.
Or I could do a pairwise
t-test, or do a t-test looking
at the difference in the
means, given the spread between
the two--
turns out to be the same test--
gives the same
significance level
whether you do it
with an F or a t.
But essentially, this
is the same question
I was just describing
qualitatively on the 3D plot,
looking at one factor at a time.
I can ask the question, do
I think the effect of depth
is significant?
This is looking at
it qualitatively.
I can go and chug, and do the
ANOVA or the t-test machinery,
but it gives the same idea.
I can do the same thing
for the material effect.
Say, if I look at aluminum
versus the stainless steel,
is that effect significant?
By the way, you can go, and chug
through, and do all of that.
What do you think?
Are these factors significant?
I have high confidence.
I'm pretty confident that
those are real effects.
There's a huge
spread between these,
so the intuition is very clear.
The interaction effect--
that's a little tricky.
So we can go in--
I would actually want to run
the ANOVA test in that case.
Here's my raw data.
There's the model I fit,
again, using the ANOVA
table that we saw a minute ago.
I could by hand form that,
or I could put it in JMP
and come out with the output.
But now here, this is very nice,
because I can look and say,
OK, associated with the mean x1,
x2, and the interaction x1, x2,
what are the mean squares
and the F compared
to our estimate of the noise?
Remember, we had 40 data points.
I'm estimating four
model coefficients.
That's leaving 36 replicate
degrees of freedom,
so I have a very good estimate
of noise in the system.
That's the denominator
in all of my F ratios.
And I'm seeing F's
from 10,000 down to 77,
and my F critical for
95% confidence is 4.1.
So it looks like all of my
F's are much bigger than that.
I have high confidence that
the mean is significant,
the main effects
are significant,
and the interaction is real.
It is bigger than
I would expect,
given the noise in the process.
So I would accept all
of those model terms.
So so far, we used
the idea of replicates
to ask the significant question.
We said our residual could have
two sources of error in it.
One is pure replication
noise, but the other thing
that we haven't really
assessed yet is,
is the model form adequate?
You might still be
nervous that maybe there's
a quadratic relationship between
output and the punch depth.
With those two data
points, the best I could do
is get a linear model.
How would you
possibly check to see
if there might be
curvature in the model,
or a quadratic effect?
Do you have enough
data to do that?
AUDIENCE: There could
be a center point.
PROFESSOR: What?
AUDIENCE: There could
be a center point.
PROFESSOR: There could
Let's add a center point.
Let's consider additional
experimental center points.
OK, so what you would do then
is run some additional things
at the center level, the zero
setting of those two data
points, and then
look at the deviation
between what the
linear model suggests
and what the actual
data comes up with.
Now, you've got to ask the
significance of the delta.
Again, your model may not
be perfect in predicting
what that center point
is, even if there
is no curvature in the model,
because there's noise also
in the model.
So we have to do two things.
One is we have to estimate
the deviation from our simpler
model-- the linear model--
versus the estimation
with the quadratic term
that would go through,
say, the center point--
go through that
additional center point,
and then compare the size of
that to the natural spread
in our data, and do essentially
an F-test or an ANOVA test
on that quadratic model term--
same thing.
Anything bother you
about this picture?
We can set up and do this
center point, and run it.
So I'm down on the two-all.
I'm setting the depth factor.
That's my x to factor, I guess.
And I put it at 0.45 inches.
I pick my part.
I got my aluminum.
I've got my stainless steel.
I need my 0-th level.
There is no center
point on that, right?
So you'd have to
actually be very careful.
If you've got only
discrete values that
don't have some ordering or
some continuous degree to them,
you can't do a center point.
So what would you
do in this case?
AUDIENCE: Physical model--
PROFESSOR: A physical model--
it's so complicated,
it's hopeless.
We don't have a physical model.
You might try a physical model.
There's something simpler
you could do, still
using design of experiments.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: You just
use the easiest one.
PROFESSOR: What's that?
AUDIENCE: Just use
the simplest one.
PROFESSOR: Just use
the simplest point?
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Maybe--
I'm thinking, what
additional experimental
point should
I run to be able to decide if
there is additional curvature?
Remember, we were
asking the question,
is there curvature or
a higher order term
associated with what variable?
Just punch depth, right?
So why don't I still
pick this, but now I
can pick data points right
here, and I might also
pick data points right here?
I don't have to
pick central point.
I could actually pick a couple.
In fact, I could even just do
the runs right here and say,
this is what the linear
model would predict.
But if there's
curvature in my surface,
then I'm going to
get a deviation, just
at the stainless steel setting.
Now, if I were careful and
trying to keep things balanced,
I might do the stainless
steel and the aluminum,
and get an estimate across both
of those at that deviation.
So essentially,
what we're trying
to do here is add a
data point and then look
at a lack of fit test in
particular, where I want
to say, is the model error--
the deviation because of this
extra higher order term--
is it explainable by
pure replicate variance,
or is it larger than that,
and therefore not explainable
by my noise factor?
If we've got more deviation
because of the quadratic term--
say, if I'm adding
an x squared--
in this model, an
x2 squared term--
then I have to reject the
null hypothesis that says,
I've just got random
variance [INAUDIBLE]..
I really need an
extra model term.
So we can still use
the basic ANOVA setup.
So this is our model
with higher order terms.
You might think about trying
to add two higher order terms.
I would argue, if this
is the material type,
it makes no sense
to add that term.
I wouldn't do that.
That would be bad.
But if this is associated
with the punch depth,
then I think it does make sense
to add the hypothesis of that.
And then you check for deviation
at one or more of those points.
And the basic question is asking
whether beta 2, 2 is equal to 0
or not.
Is the effective due
to that deviation
plausibly the same
as noise or not?
So we can go
through and do that.
Here's a simple
test, simple example.
And this is
aggregating what we saw
going back, in fact, to some
of the earlier things we talked
about of, if I don't have
replicate data, what can I do?
If I just do my full factorial
four corner point test,
no replicates, and I use
the full linear model with
interactions, I cannot test for
significance and I cannot test
for lack of fit.
That's the most bare bones
situation you've got.
I've got a perfect fit.
But you better be awfully
sure that there's not
noise going on in your
model or in your system.
Even without replicating
my corner points,
I can still step back and ask
the question about lack of fit
by adding center points.
But if I just add
one center point--
one replicate at
the center point,
can I really ask the question
about the significance
of the quadratic term?
No.
I would be able to perfectly
fit the quadratic term
with that one extra data point,
one extra model coefficient.
So you have to have replicates
somewhere in the system.
And one typical
approach is maybe
I don't want to have 10
replicates at each of my corner
points.
I'm just going to add
replicates at my center point.
So now, with the
addition of center points
to potentially check for
curvature and replicates,
I've got an estimate of random--
a replicate noise and
deviation from the linear.
So together, by adding
replicates at the center point,
you get a lot of power.
So then you can use
the ANOVA approach.
And this is just working
through and saying,
I estimate the quadratic
term or the deviation
and sum of squared
deviations from that,
form an estimate of the
variance because of that,
and compare that to
the replication error.
Here's just working that
out for our example,
where I've got the
average of my output from
the linear model, the
average at my replicate--
if my overall grand
average is a little
different than the average
coming from my center point
replicates, that's
the deviation due
to the hypothesized
quadratic term.
I can form the variance of
that, and then compare that
to my underlying estimate.
OK, and then this example
I'll let you work through.
This is just doing that for
a simple run, where, again, I
have just one run at each
of the four corner points.
This is a different
data set, by the way.
This is not the break
forming anymore.
And then I've got five
replicates here at the center
point.
Question--
AUDIENCE: Are we assuming
that the application
error and the center point is
going to be the same as the--
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So we are making the
assumption here--
and it's the same one we've
made pretty much in most ANOVA
analyses--
that the variance is the
same at all run points.
In other words, we have the
n 0 sigma squared assumption,
where sigma squared is operated
at the center point as well
as all the corner points.
So this is a neat example
where, again, we're
trying to estimate main effects,
perhaps interaction effects.
We've got an AB
interaction column here.
So just using the corner
points, we can fit a model.
We can ask the ANOVA question
on significance of that.
But I can also form
the sum of squares
due to this quadratic term and
use the replicated information
there to be able to form an
estimate of the overall process
variance.
And what that lets me do
is form the F-test line
in here for the quadratic
term, in addition to the AB
and the interaction term.
And in this case,
when I look at that F
ratio, the sum of
squared deviations
from the quadratic estimate
versus the linear estimate
compared to my estimate
of noise in the system,
I get a very small F,
well below the critical F.
And therefore, I conclude there
is no evidence of lack of fit.
I do not include
the quadratic term,
and I stick with
the linear model.
Now, would you keep
the interaction term?
Same thing-- it's
also not significant.
Would you keep the
two main effect terms?
Yeah, sure-- those are above
the F0, so I'm happy with those.
So this is a nice, simple
data set-- additive effects,
no interaction.
This is the best for ultimately
using the model in a control
kind of setting,
because I can presumably
change A and B
independently, and try
to get the output that I want.
AUDIENCE: Would the f-test be
quite close to the boundary?
Or do we have to do
sensitivity analysis to see--
[INAUDIBLE] to 96%
or 97% [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Sure.
You always got to
be a little careful
and use exactly that knowledge.
This was a 95% confidence,
and if I was anywhere
near the boundary, I
might say, well, my--
I want to include that
if I wanted to just
be 90% confidence,
because that's probably
suggesting that that model term
really does have an effect.
In this case, that cut-off--
those are very obvious.
But in other subtle
cases, you actually
have to use some
intuition and knowledge.
One part of that does
look at-- maybe you're
getting at this a little
bit with sensitivity.
There's another sensitivity
analysis you can do,
which has to do with
not tweaking the alpha
level, the significance level--
you can tweak that a
little bit, but you also
might ask the question
slightly differently
about whether the model
coefficient is real or not.
That's a significance question.
You can also ask the question,
how big is the effective?
Is it so big that I would want
to include it in the model?
Or it's real, but it's so tiny
compared to my other effects
that I'm going to neglect it.
So there is this difference
between significant, real,
and important or not.
And so that's where your
knowledge of the process
also comes into play, and
whether you might want
to include or drop model terms.
OK.
I think what we'll
do is I'll go--
I might actually only go
for about five more minutes
and give you a little bit
of a glimpse of blocks
and confounding, talk about
these nuisance factors
a little bit.
And then next time,
we'll come back and dive
in more on fractional
factorial designs,
because there are
some additional design
issues I've only alluded
to in experimental design.
So far, we've really just
done full factorial--
these corner points--
and then also the
idea of center points
to ask the question
about curvature.
But there may be other factors.
Maybe there was the temperature
in our break forming tool
that we didn't really want
to do a design experiment on.
We're not really sure
it's important or not,
but maybe it's out there.
There may be all these
other nuisance factors
or nuisance effects.
They may affect the
output, but I didn't really
want to include the
effect in the model.
And I'd rather suppress them,
and for sure suppress them
from making--
from me making a
mistake and confusing
the effect of temperature with,
say, the effect of which metal
I use.
So what are the
approaches you can do?
Well, in many
cases, I may not be
able to run the
whole experiment,
holding that factor constant.
In general, you
would really want
to make sure, well, if
temperature affects things,
I want to hold the temperature
of the tool as constant
as I can--
try to keep everything else
it's constant as possible.
Time can often be an
important substitute
for nuisance effects.
Time is going on, and other
things may be changing.
So you can't entirely
suppress potentially
all these other
nuisance effects.
But in general, you want to
keep everything else constant.
But some cases-- you
may not be able to hold
everything else constant.
And if you know some
of these factors--
like temperature perhaps
throughout the day
varies in my machine shop, say--
then it may be uncontrollable.
But it's a known
factor, in which case, I
might want to think about
that and randomize the order
of my runs against that.
So I equally include some high
levels of that nuisance factor
and some low levels of
that nuisance factor
in each of my other settings.
So I try as much as
I can to randomize,
basically convert that effect
from a systematic effect
into a random noise effect.
In many cases, if I can actually
pick the level of temperature--
it's known and controllable--
you can actually
design your experiment,
separate out the
data into blocks
where, in each of
the two blocks,
the nuisance factor
is held constant.
And what we have the
opportunity to do
is transform the effect
of that nuisance factor
into what would only be a
very higher order interaction
term in our model.
And that's the intuition
I want to just give you
a little bit of a glimpse
for, and then we'll
talk about next time.
First off, if the
thing is controllable,
we would just want to, say,
replicate and randomize.
Here's an example
where we're looking
for the hardness of four
different test samples,
but I'm doing it with
an indentation test,
but I've got four
different tips that I'm
using for the indentation.
I don't really care
about the tip factor,
but I'm worried that
it might perturb
my estimate of the hardness.
So you can, first off,
basically think of it
as I'm just going to
run with all four tips
and take the average,
and that's my best
average of-- or estimate of
the hardness in the four cases.
So I'm just replicating
around that nuisance factor--
not including it in
the model explicitly,
but on randomizing or
replicating around it.
Many cases-- you don't
have the opportunity.
It's too expensive to
do lots of replications.
And what I want to do
is arrange things so
that, if there is
a nuisance factor,
it will have the least
damaging effect on my model.
So here's my one little
intuitive example.
Suppose we've got
this 2-by-2 design.
So I've got two factors,
two levels doing four runs.
But let's say I
have two arrange it
where I do two runs
at low temperature
and two runs at
high temperature--
have to do two runs in the
morning, two in the afternoon,
and during the day, my
machine job heats up.
That's just the way it is.
I've got to live with it.
Which two runs should I pick to
do with the high temperature,
and which two runs should I
do at the low temperature?
Suppose I did it
like this, where
this was my low temperature and
this was my high temperature.
Any problem with that?
Big problem with that--
if x2 has an
effect, I can't tell
whether that's a
temperature effect
or and x2 effect, because
I did both of my x2 runs
at the low temperature and
both of my high values of x2
at the high temperature.
I don't know whether it's a
temperature effect when I form
that contrast or an x2 effect.
Is there a better way
to arrange or pick
which two lines I want
to do so that I don't get
confused with the main
effects in the experiment?
And the intuition here is yes,
there is a better approach.
What if I pick block 1 to run
the 1 and AB combinations?
So what if I pick
block 1 to run--
what'd I say?
The 1 and the AB?
1 and AB-- notice
what's nice about that.
The 1 and the AB--
so make that block 1
and make this block 2--
notice that neither
block is corresponding
to both high settings or both
low settings for either factor.
What, in fact, the
blockage is actually
lining up with is the x1,
x2 interaction factor.
I don't want to get confused
about whether there's
a main effect or this
nasty nuisance factor
is having an effect.
What I would am
willing to do is be
confused, or confound between my
block effect and my interaction
effect.
I won't be able to tell
if the interaction is real
or not, but that's OK.
I believe it's not, and I'd
rather mix in my block factor.
So this gets to this idea of
forming patterns-- or blocking,
in this case-- to confound
so that I can detect
some things, and not others.
And we'll talk more
about that next time--
talk a little bit more
generally about confounding.
And this actually leads
into the main idea
of fractional
factorial design, where
I may not want to pick
all of my corner points.
I might subset some
of them, because I'm
willing to be confused
about whether there's
a fourth-order factor that's
also the same detection
or same contrast with a
second-order interaction
factor.
I don't care.
And therefore, if
I don't care, I
can actually reduce the
number of experimental points
we want to do.
So we'll talk about
that next time.